Suicide Prevention Among Youth in Connecticut
Topic Selection and Population of Interest
The topic of interest which I have selected is suicide prevention among the youth in Connecticut, because suicide committed is growing into a public health crisis in the state and across the nation. “Recent reports by CDC highlight the rate of suicide among individuals aged 10 to 24 has increased by 62% in 2021” (Youth suicides are rising in CT , The Village, 2024). Along with this is a recent report in the state of Connecticut which said a total of nine youth suicides were reported in two months of 2024. This makes suicide the second leading cause of death among this age group. Depression and anxiety are the most common signs seen among people prone to committing suicide. “14% of all high school students in Connecticut considered attempting suicide out of which 5.9% reported attempting suicide in the year 2021” (2022, Epidemiological Profile. n.d.). Females and LGBTQ+ students were more likely to consider suicide attempt (Youth suicides are rising in CT , The Village, 2024). This indicates the importance of public health intervention and how this can be addressed to make both immediate and long – term effects in the community across Connecticut (State of Connecticut Suicide Prevention Plan, 2020).
Relevance to Public Health
Suicide prevention is highly relevant to public health because preventing it requires intervention from medical and major role of public health education and promotion. Suicide prevention requires health education, awareness and support by reducing stigma around mental health, teaching coping skills to youth and creating environment such as social groups where youth and children of that age can feel safe in reaching out to people for help. Health education also helps parents, teachers, guardians and peers in recognizing warning signs and helping children in need of support. Apart from this public health can play a role in creating youth friendly social media campaigns, introduce school-based mental health services and mobile crisis services (Youth suicides are rising in CT , The Village, 2024).
Alignment with Healthy People 2030-
Suicide Prevention among Youth has strong alignment with multiple Healthy People 2030 Goals. 
•	Goal 2: “Eliminate health disparity, achieve health equity, and attain health literacy to improve the health and well-being of all” (Healthy People 2030, 2020).
Suicides committed by people in Connecticut were among certain groups such as LGBTQ+ youth, female students and people of specific ethnic/racial minorities such as Hispanic teens than non-Hispanic white youth. Suicide prevention efforts such as education, access to help and mental health awareness can reduce these disparities among people of all backgrounds (Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, 2022).
•	Goal 4: “Promote health development, healthy behaviors and well-being across all life stages” (Healthy People 2030, 2020).
Promoting mental health education and suicide prevention is necessary not only for youth but also among guardians so that their elderly people around the ones affected can help the youth. “Connecticut is already implementing several strategies to promote youth well-being such as Expanded school-based health centers, 24/7 Mobile Crisis Services, the 1 word, 1 Voice, 1 Life campaigns” (Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, 2022). These Suicide prevention programs will protect youth and prevent further loss of life.
.
 
References
Explore Teen Suicide in Connecticut | AHR. (2022). Americashealthrankings.org. https://www.americashealthrankings.org/explore/measures/teen_suicide/CT
Healthy People 2030. (2020). Healthy people 2030 framework. Health.gov. https://odphp.health.gov/healthypeople/about/healthy-people-2030-framework
Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion. (2022). Reduce the suicide rate — MHMD 01 - Healthy People 2030 | odphp.health.gov. Health.gov. https://odphp.health.gov/healthypeople/objectives-and-data/browse-objectives/mental-health-and-mental-disorders/reduce-suicide-rate-mhmd-01
‌State of Connecticut Suicide Prevention Plan. (2020). https://sprc.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/11/State-of-Connecticut-Suicide-Prevention-Plan-2020-2025.pdf
2022 Epidemiological Profile: Suicide Prevalence At-Risk Populations A product of the State Epidemiological Outcomes Workgroup (SEOW). (n.d.). Retrieved September 1, 2025, from https://preventionportal.ctdata.org/products/2022%20Suicide%20Profile_FINAL.pdf
Youth suicides are rising in CT. Mental health advocates and providers offer ways to help. | The Village. The Village. https://thevillage.org/news-events/youth-suicides-are-rising-in-ct-mental-health-advocates-and-providers-offer-ways-to-help/
